hi everyone this will just be a quick
little video to address what seems to be
widespread confusion about narcissism
i'm a clinical psychologist who writes
about researches and treats pathological
narcissism and related disorders and as
i've discussed in a few of my previous
videos narcissism is a very stigmatized
disorder it's extremely difficult to
find any information about npd or
narcissism online that isn't extremely
charged with skewed representations of
narcissists as predators and abusers and
isn't also hyper focused on a very
narrow definition of the disorder that's
actually extremely rare in the general
population here's a very simple and
accurate clinical definition of
narcissism it's adapted from an article
that appeared in the annual review of
clinical psychology in preparation for
the publication of the dsm-5 narcissism
is defined as the capacity to maintain a
relatively positive self-image through a
variety of self-affect and field
regulatory processes so what does that
mean exactly well it means that
narcissism as a clinical construct
refers to a person's ability to maintain
a positive stable and realistic
self-image despite the challenges that
life throws at them
now notice that this definition of
narcissism is not about mental illness
and that's because narcissism is a broad
concept in psychology and it refers to
both healthy and pathological
functioning
okay so here's the definition of
narcissism as a mental illness something
we call pathological narcissism
it's defined as difficulty maintaining a
positive realistic self-image
accompanied by deficits and effective
coping when threats to self-image are
encountered now notice i made no mention
of inflated self-esteem or
self-importance
pathological narcissism is not about
having too much of anything it's not
about having too much self-confidence
it's not about having too much
self-regard or too much vanity it's
defined by deficits
deficits and self-image deficits and
coping deficits and social functioning
and awareness
now these deficits show up in the form
of two broad phenotypic expressions of
pathological narcissism the first is one
that everybody's already familiar with
called narcissistic grandiosity
that's defined as dysfunction
characterized by an overvalued entitled
self-image exploitative exhibitionistic
behaviors absorption by idealized
fantasies and other maladaptive
self-enhancement strategies now this is
the picture of someone who has
difficulty maintaining a realistic and
stable self-image who compensates by
adopting an inflated sense of
self-importance it's the person who has
too little but pretends they have too
much
the second is one that not very many
people are familiar with it's called
narcissistic vulnerability it's defined
as dysfunction that's characterized by a
depleted enfeebled self-image angry
shameful and depressed affects
self-criticality suicidality
interpersonal hypersensitivity and
social withdrawal
this is the picture of a person who is
depressed ashamed and self-critical
sometimes to the point of being suicidal
they're sensitive to feeling rejected
and they avoid social gatherings it
isn't your stereotypical picture of a
narcissist
it's also important to remember that
these are not different types of
narcissist
all pathological narcissists fluctuate
between periods of grandiosity and
vulnerability the guy who seems
completely full of himself and like he
has an unrealistically positive
self-image likely goes through private
periods of breakdown and vulnerability
the same goes for the quietly depressed
narcissist who has an unrealistically
negative self-image that person likely
go through goes through intense periods
of grandiosity and inflated self-esteem
so the next time you come across a book
or a video or a website stigmatizing
narcissism remember that this is a
mental illness we're talking about and
one that is much more often expressed in
the form of fragile self-image and
chronic breakdown than a mustache
twirling social vampire the majority of
narcissists are just trying to keep a
stable realistic and relatively positive
self-image they have a social and
emotional disability they're not
monsters who are out to get anyone
okay thanks for listening and thanks for
joining me take care